[Docs] UI Budget automations & month-end cleanup (#7863)
actualbudget/actual: packages/docs/docs/experimental/budget-automation.md

With one click you can fill in your entire budget based on the automations you have added. At the end of the month, another click can clean up what’s leftover!

Here are a few examples of what you can do, all with a single click!

- Budget $ 100 every month
- Budget $ 50 every other week
- Refill a category to $ 300 at the start of a month
- Add all leftover funds to a savings category
- Budget 10% of your income for savings or charity
- Budget the average you spend over the last 6 months
- Save up for a big purchase many months or years in the future, and let Actual dynamically figure out how much to budget every month
- And much more!

## Notes Templates & UI Migration
For any given category, there is one source of truth for Budget automations, either the UI or the notes, not both.

If you have a notes template, the first time you open the UI (clock icon) you will be presented with migration automation(s). Click to show the original notes templates at the top of the form for comparison.

![alt-text-here](/img/goal-template/migration.webp)

Make any changes you feel are needed, then _Save_ the form to complete the migration. The notes can now be deleted. 

> ## Creating Automations {/* #create-automations */}

Author: {/_ #id _/} syntax came directly from Docusaurus documentation, but I changed them to the old style, so you should be happy now.

![save by date automation](/img/goal-template/save-by-date-automation.webp)

**Options:**

- **Repeat** (C). You can repeat the automation if your target is cyclical, such as bills due quarterly or yearly. If you need to repeat based on a number of days or weeks, use the _Fixed amount_ automation.
- **Allow early spending** (D). This option allows you to spend funds along the way. Starting in the month you choose, you can spend from the category without the automation recalculating the remaining monthly amounts. By the target date, the remaining balance will be the amount you did not spend earlier. This option is handy for times when spending happens months before the event, like travel savings, wedding plans or the birthday gifts in our example.

:::warning
All _Save by date_ automations in the same category must have the same priority.
:::

### Cover Schedule {#cover-schedule}

This automation budgets based on a schedule previously added to actual.<br />
Pick a schedule (A) and a mode (B). See below for a discussion on [adjustments (C)](#adjustments).

![cover schedule automation](/img/goal-template/schedule-automation.webp)

**There are two modes:**

> For schedules repeating monthly or more often. they are equivalent.

Author: Done

![balance cap example showing October](/img/goal-template/october-restaurants.webp)

Here’s another example. We want to budget 300 every 2 weeks, but not in months with 3 Fridays. We place a 600 balance cap on our category and start a _Fixed amount_ automation at 300 every 2 weeks on a Friday.

There are 3 Fridays in July, but the Balance cap holds our grocery budget at 600.00:

![balance cap example showing July](/img/goal-template/july-food.webp)

---

## Long-term Goals and Budget Indicators {#indicators}

### Budget Indicator {#budget-indicator}

After automations run, each category’s budget indicator appears as the color of its balance text. Hover over a balance to see the matching tooltip.

The example below shows these states: normal (no automation), empty (no automation), projected budget met (green), projected budget not met (orange), and negative balance (red).

![budget indicators](/img/goal-template/budget-indicators.webp)

The tooltip will give you more information about your budget and balance:

![budget balance tooltip fully funded](/img/goal-template/fully-funded-automation.webp)

> ![budget balance tooptip underfunded](/img/goal-template/underfunded-automation.webp)

Author: Done

# Budget Automation

:::warning
This is an **experimental feature**. That means we're still working on finishing it. There may be bugs, missing functionality or incomplete documentation, and we may decide to remove the feature in a future release. If you have any feedback, please [use the feedback issue on github](https://github.com/actualbudget/actual/issues/7692) or post a message in the Discord.
:::

:::warning

> All functionality described here may not be available in the latest stable release. See [Experimental Features](/docs/experimental/) for instructions to enable experimental features. Use the `edge` images for the latest implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All functionality described here may not be available in the latest stable release. See [Experimental Features](/docs/experimental/) for instructions to enable experimental features. Use the `nightly` images for the latest implementation.
```

:::

Budget automations allow you to automate your budgeting step every month.
With budget automations, there is no need to manually fill in each category each month.
With one click you can fill in your entire budget based on the automations you have added. At the end of the month, another click can clean up what’s leftover!

Here are a few examples of what you can do, all with a single click!

- Budget $ 100 every month
- Budget $ 50 every other week
- Refill a category to $ 300 at the start of a month
- Add all leftover funds to a savings category
- Budget 10% of your income for savings or charity
- Budget the average you spend over the last 6 months
- Save up for a big purchase many months or years in the future, and let Actual dynamically figure out how much to budget every month
- And much more! Check out this [blog entry from 2023!](/blog/2023-12-15-automate-your-budget-with-goal-templates) Although it was written in the early days of note templates, it's still pertinent today!

---

## Notes Templates & UI Migration

For any given category, there is one source of truth for Budget automations, either the UI or the notes, not both.

> If you have a notes template, the first time you open the UI (clock icon) you will be presented with migration automation(s). Click to show the original notes templates at the top of the form for comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a notes template, the first time you open the UI (pie chart icon) you will be presented with migration automation(s). Click to show the original notes templates at the top of the form for comparison.
```

Author: LOL - it looks like a clock, too!

![goal migration form](/img/goal-template/migration.webp)

> Make any changes you feel are needed, then _Save_ the form to complete the migration. The notes can now be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make any changes you feel are needed, then _Save_ the form to complete the migration. The notes can now be deleted. Once you have migrated to UI based automations, adding new ones to the notes will no longer work. To revert back to using notes, you'll need to "Unmigrate" from the bottom left of the UI modal.
```

Author: This section is on top to make it easy to remove.

Reviewer: It's in a good place, and an important note. I just think it should be expanded a bit to explain how to move back and why adding to notes will not work any more. We've already had a couple of people confused by this and that's only in edge

---

## Creating Automations {#create-automations}

> Click on the clock icon that appears when you hover over a category name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click on the pie chart icon that appears when you hover over a category name.
```

> ![clock icon to open automation form](/img/goal-template/automation-icon.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![pie chart icon to open automation form](/img/goal-template/automation-icon.webp)
```

From the opening view, you can

A. Add a new budget automation<br />
B. Add a long-term goal<br />
C. Add month-end cleanup to the category

:::info

> Balance caps can only be added to existing budget automations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A balance cap only takes effect once another automation is contributing funds to the category
```

Author: You can't add them either! I'll add your sentence.

Reviewer: True, but the "existing budget automation" is a little bit confusing. The UI should block it out anyway to people will work it out pretty quickly

Author: Alrighty.

:::

![new automation form](/img/goal-template/new-automation.webp)

You can have multiple automations!

:::tip
The projected amount to be budgeted will be shown in the top right of the automation form. This will update with the category’s automations.
:::

![multiple automations](/img/goal-template/multiple-automations.webp)

:::tip

> Don't forget to **Save** your work when you are through adding and editing automations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't forget to **Save** your work when you are finished adding and editing automations.
```

Author: So formal, you Brits ;)

Reviewer: Haha, happy either way here, just jumped out at me!

:::

### Priorities {#priorities}

Most of the budget automations will have a priority field that you can use to set the order in which the automations are run, from lowest to highest.

- Negative priorities are not allowed.
- All priority 0 are run first, then 1, 2, 30, 36, etc. So the automation that has the highest priority in importance actually has the lowest priority **number**.

> - All priorities with the same number will run in database order. To ensure the budget fills in the exact order you wish, give each automation a different priority number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All priorities with the same number will run in database order. In the case you'd like to specify an exact order to run, you may have to give each automation a different priority number.
```

Author: I'll change it, but "In the case" is definitely only British.

Reviewer: It's fine to leave it, we don't need every British-ism sneaking in.

:::warning

> - Priority 0 automations will budget funds even if they are not available in **To Budget**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Priority 0 automations will budget funds even if **To Budget** does not hold a sufficient amount, which can lead to "To Budget" going negative.
```

Author: Changed.

- Priorities other than 0 will **not** budget more funds than are available.
- If you have multiple _Cover schedule_ or _Save by date_ automations in a single category, their priorities **must** match.
  :::

:::tip
When you first start using priorities, space them 10 numbers apart so you have room to insert additional priorities later.
:::

### Automation Notes {#automation-notes}

> Automations, Balance caps and Long-term goals can each have their own note. This is handy; you can jot down what you are trying to accomplish with the automation. For example, with a long-term goal, you could note when you are hoping to reach it and what you are hoping to purchase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every automation can have their own note. This is handy; you can jot down what you are trying to accomplish with the automation. For example, with a long-term goal, you could note when you are hoping to reach it and what you are hoping to purchase.
```

![automation with note](/img/goal-template/automation-note.webp)

> When you hover over a category automation icon (clock), you will see all of the automations present and the notes associated with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you hover over a category automation icon (pie chart), you will see all of the automations present and the notes associated with them.
```

Here are two examples:

General budget automations:

> ![general budget toolyip](/img/goal-template/automation-tooltip-1.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![general budget tooltip](/img/goal-template/automation-tooltip-1.webp)
```

![save by date automation](/img/goal-template/save-by-date-automation.webp)

**Options:**

- **Repeat** (C). You can repeat the automation if your target is cyclical, such as bills due quarterly or yearly. If you need to repeat based on a number of days or weeks, use the _Fixed amount_ automation.
- **Allow early spending** (D). This option allows you to spend funds along the way. Starting in the month you choose, you can spend from the category without the automation recalculating the remaining monthly amounts. By the target date, the remaining balance will be the amount you did not spend earlier. This option is handy for times when spending happens months before the event, like travel savings, wedding plans or the birthday gifts in our example.

:::warning
All _Save by date_ automations in the same category must have the same priority.
:::

### Cover Schedule {#cover-schedule}

This automation budgets based on a schedule previously added to actual.<br />
Pick a schedule (A) and a mode (B). See below for a discussion on [adjustments (C)](#adjustments).

![cover schedule automation](/img/goal-template/schedule-automation.webp)

> **There are two modes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**There are two modes (for schedules repeating monthly, or more, they are equivalent):**
```

Author: Added.

Reviewer: I've misspelled equivalent...

Author: I saw that, hence not added to the batch. ;)

Reviewer: Fixed now

- **Save for the next occurrence.** The automation budgets a portion of the scheduled amount each month so the full amount is ready when needed.
- **Cover each occurrence when it occurs.** The automation budgets for the schedule only in the month it occurs. It will budget the full scheduled amount.

You can edit the schedule in the schedule editor and the automation will stay up to date automatically.

:::warning
All _Cover schedule_ automations in the same category must have the same priority.
:::

### From History {#from-history}

> For this automation, you can choose to budget based on historical data.<br />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this automation, you can budget based on historical data.<br />
```

Choose a mode (A) and the number of months back (B). This is another automation that allows for [adjustments (C)](#adjustments).

![historical automation](/img/goal-template/historical-automation.webp)

**Modes:**

- **Copy a previous month.** This will copy the **budget** from a previous month.
- **Average of previous months.** This will average the **spending** from the previous number of months you choose.

### % of Income {#percentage}

This automation budgets a percentage of income from this month or last month, or a percentage of available funds from this month.

![percentage automation](/img/goal-template/percentage-automation.webp)

When you click in the Category field, you will be presented with current choices to base the percentage on.

![percentage automation category](/img/goal-template/percentage-category.webp)

> - **Total of all income.** This month or Last month. The _Inflow to Budget, Received_ column in the budget will be used.

Reviewer: I understand what you're saying here, but I think the wording relating to the column needs tweaking

```suggestion
- **Total of all income.** This month or Last month. The combined amount associated with all income categories will be used.
```

Author: Changed.

> - **Available funds to budget.** This month only. The available amount after Priority 0 and other automations with lower or equal priorities have run will be used.

Reviewer: This should probably be dropped (in the code too). We already cover it with the "whatever is left" automation.

Author: Let's leave it in for now, until the code is changed and tested that they are equivalent.

- **Specific income categories.** This month or Last month. The percentage will be based on the single income category you choose.

### Refill to Cap {#refill}

This automation requires a [Balance cap](#balance-cap) and will refill the category to the cap.

![refill automation](/img/goal-template/refill-automation.webp)

Click on _Add balance limit_ and you will be taken to the Balance cap automation. After you add a balance cap, the refill automation will be active.

![active refill automation](/img/goal-template/refill-active.webp)

### Whatever is Left {#remainder}

> After all of the other automations have run, the leftover of **To Budget** will be doled out by these remainder automations based on the weights you choose. They run last, in a separate pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all of the other automations have run, the leftover of **To Budget** will be doled out by these remainder automations based on the weights you choose.
```

![remainder automation](/img/goal-template/remainder-automation.webp)

- You can have as many remainder automations as you like.
- Remainder automations will respect any balance caps in place.

> - If you want **To Budget** = 0.00 after these run, make sure at least one of them is in a category without a balance cap.

Reviewer: I know what you're saying but I think it could come across confusing, best to let people work that one out for themselves I think

```suggestion
```

Author: OK

#### Weights {#remainder-weights}

The sum of the weights of all remainder automations is used to determine the split amounts:<br />
`budgeted_amount = available_funds / sum_of_weights * category_weight`<br />

> If a category has a balance cap, the automation will fill to the cap, subtract that amount from the available funds, then make another pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a category has a balance cap, the automation will fill to the cap, and then continue to distrubute to any other remainder automations.
```

Author: It actually makes a full separate pass with the sum of the leftover weights. It doesn't just continue. This is very hard to describe. The example shows it and I tested it a bunch of times.

This feature adds adjustments to either [_Cover schedule_](#cover-schedule) or [_From history_](#from-history) automations.

You can adjust your automation by either a _Fixed amount_ or by _Percentage_.

![adjustment types](/img/goal-template/adjustment-type.webp)

The _Fixed amount_ type can either increase or decrease the amount budgeted. The default is to increase the amount. Click the **+** to switch.

![fixed amount adjustment](/img/goal-template/adjustment-fixed.webp)

The _Percentage_ type can also either increase or decrease the budgeted amount by a percentage.

![percentage adjustment](/img/goal-template/adjustment-percentage.webp)

---

## Balance cap {#balance-cap}

Set a maximum amount over which the budget automations will not add funds.

![balance cap](/img/goal-template/balance-cap.webp)

> - If the category balance exceeds the cap, the next budgeting pass will remove the excess.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- By default, if the category balance exceeds the cap, the excess will be removed
```

Author: The cleanup will not respect the cap until a new budgeting pass.

Reviewer: You're technically right, which is the best kind (!), but the concept of "passes" feels a little in the weeds. I see what you're saying here though because it won't happen until you hit budget again (right?)

Author: Yup. I can add a bunch of less jargony words.

- To keep any extra funds in the category, enable _Retain existing funds over the cap_. When this option is turned on, the next budgeting pass will leave the excess in place.

All automations in the category will be subject to the cap.

### Examples

Here’s an interesting example of budgeting money for a meal out every Saturday night and weekday work lunches in the same category.

- The Saturday night meals are budgeted at 50.00/week starting on a Saturday.
- The weekday lunches are budgeted at 35.00/week starting on a Monday.
- The Balance cap is set at 85.00/week based on Mondays.

> June has 4 Saturdays and 5 Mondays. The projected budget is $375:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
June has 4 Saturdays and 5 Mondays. The projected budget is 375:
```

![balance cap example showing June](/img/goal-template/june-restaurants.webp)

> July has 4 Saturdays and 4 Mondays. The projected budget is #340:

Reviewer: Highlighting these because we try to stay currency agnostic in the docs, also your examples at the bottom of this section don't use currency symbols.

```suggestion
July has 4 Saturdays and 4 Mondays. The projected budget is 340:
```

![balance cap example showing July](/img/goal-template/july-restaurants.webp)

> August has 5 Saturdays and 5 Mondays. The projected budget is $425:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
August has 5 Saturdays and 5 Mondays. The projected budget is 425:
```

![balance cap example showing August](/img/goal-template/august-restaurants.webp)

October has 5 Saturdays and 4 Mondays. Our budget looks different as the Balance cap is based on the 4 Mondays! <br />

> So, the budget covers 4 Saturday meals and 4 work weeks. The projected budget is $340.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, the budget covers 4 Saturday meals and 4 work weeks. The projected budget is 340.
```

![balance cap example showing October](/img/goal-template/october-restaurants.webp)

> Here’s another example. We want to budget $300 every 2 weeks, but not in months with 3 Fridays. We place a 600.00 balance cap on our category and start a _Fixed amount_ automation at 300.00 every 2 weeks on a Friday.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here’s another example. We want to budget 300 every 2 weeks, but not in months with 3 Fridays. We place a 600 balance cap on our category and start a _Fixed amount_ automation at 300 every 2 weeks on a Friday.
```

There are 3 Fridays in July, but the Balance cap holds our grocery budget at 600.00:

![balance cap example showing July](/img/goal-template/july-food.webp)

---

## Long-term Goals and Budget Indicators {#indicators}

### Budget Indicator {#budget-indicator}

After automations run, each category’s budget indicator appears as the color of its balance text. Hover over a balance to see the matching tooltip.

The example below shows these states: normal (no automation), empty (no automation), projected budget met (green), projected budget not met (orange), and negative balance (red).

![budget indicators](/img/goal-template/budget-indicators.webp)

The tooltip will give you more information about your budget and balance:

![budget balance tooltip fully funded](/img/goal-template/fully-funded-automation.webp)

![budget balance tooptip underfunded](/img/goal-template/underfunded-automation.webp)

### Long-term Goal {#long-term-goal}

> Long-term goals change how the budget indicator works. Instead of being based on the budgeted amount, the long-term goal will indicate how much progress you have made toward a desired target. Importantly, if you have met your projected budget for the month but are shy of your long-term goal the balance will remain orange.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Long-term goals change how the budget indicator works. Instead of being based on the budgeted amount, the balance coloring will indicate how much progress you have made toward a desired target. Importantly, if you have met your projected budget for the month but are shy of your long-term goal the balance will remain orange.
```

- **Overwrite with budget template** will fill in all budget cells using automations and overwrite any already existing budget amounts. This is the recommended method if you are using priorities greater than 0.

#### Apply automations selectively {#apply-selective-automations}

- **Single Category**: Use the "Overwrite with template" option shown below from the budget field drop-down menu to apply automations to just that category. This will overwrite any existing budgeted amount.

![Apply templates to single category](/img/goal-template/apply-template-category.png)

- **Apply automations to a single category group**: Use the "Overwrite with templates" option shown below from the category group drop-down menu to apply all automations to categories in a specific group. If you are viewing multiple months, it will apply them to the month furthest to the left in your budget view. This will overwrite any existing budgets in the categories in the group.

![Apply templates to a group of categories](/img/goal-template/apply-template-group.png)

---

## End of Month Cleanup {#month-end-cleanup}

> At month end, you can use cleanup automations to sweep up the surplus from categories that you overfunded and automatically distribute them to overspent categories and then, other categories, such as savings, vacation, or debt payoff.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At month end, you can use cleanup automations to sweep up the surplus from categories that you overfunded and automatically cover any overspent categories and then distribute any leftovers to other categories, such as savings, vacation, or debt payoff.
```

**Send leftover to pool** (source). This sends surplus category funds to the named pool to be distributed.

**Receive leftover from pool** (sink). After overspent categories in this named pool are covered, leftover funds in the pool are distributed by weight to the categories in the pool.

![cleanup receive leftovers](/img/goal-template/named-pool-leftovers.webp)

:::note

Enable _Only enough to cover any overspending_ to restrict the category from receiving leftover pool funds.

:::

### Running end of month cleanup

End of month cleanup is run from the main menu in the Budget Header.

![main menu cleanup item](/img/goal-template/cleanup-01.webp)

After clicking _End of month cleanup_, cleanup works sequentially as follows:

1. **All named pools are run first.**
   - Funds in pool source categories are swept up into the pool.
   - Overspent categories in the pool are filled with pool funds, if possible, then
   - Leftover pool funds are distributed by weight within the pool.
   - If no categories in the pool are set to receive funds from the pool, leftover funds go to **To Budget**.<br /><br />
2. **Global cleanup runs next.**

>    - Funds in _Send leftover_ categories are swept into **To Budget**. Source categories with a negative balance are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Funds in _Send leftover_ categories are swept into **To Budget**.
```

>    - Overspent categories are found and cleanup attempts to cover the overspending from **To Budget**. Categories using _Rollover Overspending_ are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Overspent categories are covered with funds from **To Budget**. If there are insufficient funds to do this, cleanup covers as much as it can. Categories using _Rollover Overspending_ are ignored.
```

>    - _Receive leftover_ categories are found and cleanup distributes the leftover **To Budget** funds by weight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Categories set to _Receive leftover_ are found and cleanup distributes the leftover **To Budget** funds by weight.
```

**I want to recover money from my Dining Out category because I always over budget and use that money to cover my overspent categories.**

- Use _Send leftover_ in the **Dining Out** category. When clicking _End of month cleanup_, the extra money will be returned to **To Budget** and be used to cover the overspent categories. If there is any leftover, it will remain in **To Budget**.

**I'm behind on saving for our big Holiday celebration and would like to catch up faster. I would also like to save a little extra for vacation. Of any extra money I can find, I would like to put 1/3 in savings for the Holiday and 2/3 for vacation.**

- Use _Send leftover_ in the categories where you can find some extra money.
- Use _Receive leftover_ with a weight of 1 in your **Holiday Celebration** category.
- Use _Receive leftover_ with a weight of 2 in your **Vacation** category.

:::note
The weights could be 34 and 66 to give a closer approximation of 1/3 and 2/3 where 34 + 66 = 100.

> :::

Reviewer: This is probably a bit over the top, I imagine the engine sorts out 33.3% and 66.6% automatically

Author: It was there before... shrug... your call.

Reviewer: Just checked the engine, 34/66 is actually a worse approximation of 1/3 - 2/3. Let's drop this
